Spring wheat to accelerate introgression of herbicide resistance from hard red winter wheat to Oregon soft white winter wheat

Creators: Colette Richter

Affiliation: Oregon State University

Template: NSF

Last modified: 03-14-2019


# Data description
Data recorded will include dates of planting for each generation, anthesis, and harvest. This data will be studied through observation and recorded in a table with the date and variety name on an Excel file. The plants will be grown in greenhouses on OSU's campus to maintain near constant and ideal growing conditions. The conditions will also be recorded. To genotype the plants, tissue samples of each individual will be collected and used for phenol-chloroform DNA extraction. Kompetative Allele Specific PCR (KASP) will be used to read the extracted DNA in a StepOne machine for various genes and then recorded in a table stating whether the gene was present or not on an Excel file. The genes that will be tested for include seed color, herbicide resistance, and resistance to PNW diseases. Molecular markers and primers will be used (with KASP) to identify the resistance genes and quality genes. Excel files will also be made to keep a record of the specific crosses made between individual plants. For each Excel files, there will be a data dictionary describing the contents of the file. Such as an explaination of what the data is for, dates of when data was collected, a key for any acronyms, and any other metadata deemed necessary. Laboratory notebooks will be used to record observations, procedures and other ideas throughout the project. This dataset will be around 2 or 3 MB. This experiment will occur over the course of about two years. The study started November 2017 and has a goal end date of November 2019.

# Roles and responsibilities
Colette Richter is in charge of keeping track of the dates of planting, harvest and anthesis, extracting DNA, data description, a laboratory notebook, metadata generation, quality control for the methods/work flow and data analysis. Two lab technicians (Lab techs 1 and 2) and Richter are in charge of the genotyping data and overall data organization. Lab techs 1 is in charge of the molecular marker data and primers to identify the traits being selected as well as instrumentation maintenance, software creation and maintenance if needed, and access control. Lab tech 2 helps with quality control for the plants, making sure the plants stay a live and healthy with fertilizer, herbicides etc. in order for the data collection to go smoothly. Overall, Richter does most of the data collection since it is her thesis, but Lab techs 1 and 2 also help when needed.

The PI, Robert Zemetra, will help with the access control of the publication as well as quality control of the thesis. Archiving and preservation of data will be maintained by the PI as well as through another one of his faculty assistants. The data will be unrestricted data since the main objective of this research is to provide other plant breeders with a potentially faster breeding scheme for wheat. There are no data management or data sharing requirements of the lab. There are also no disclosure agreements.

If someone were to leave, the project could continue. Lab tech 1 and 2 have similar skills and could take over if the other were to leave. There are also other faculty that can help as well. If the PI leaves and a new PI steps in and wishes to continue the project, it could be easily continued. The project could also be stopped and continued later on since all of the seed from each individual from every generation is saved. 

In order to hold everyone accountable for their responsibilities, laboratory notebooks are kept and updated regularly, initials are made on Word and Excel sheets to note who entered the data or metadata. Monthly meetings will occur in order to keep strong communication.

# Data standards and metadata
The OSU Wheat Breeding lab does not have a data or a metadata standard. There are no metadata requirements for the lab. It is a general plant breeding program that does not perform a lot of research unless it is through the graduate students. Therefore, it is up to the graduate students on how they wish to store and create their metadata as well as their data. AgMES provides access to bibliographic information on agricultural science and technology and was developed by the FAO. It has the goal of providing global public data in multiple languages through access to publications, journal articles, book chapters and more; this metadata standard will be used and submitted there.

Zotero is used to manage data for reference article to create files for different topics and chapters of the thesis and potentially metadata. Data including the dates (planting, anthesis, harvest) will be kept on an Excel file that will include a section for metadata. These documents will be kept on a personal laptop as well as on the lab’s R drive, a stoarge drive that is backed up and maintained by Roots IT Support group at OSU. Roots IT Support is OSU's computing group that provides infrastructure and support for multiple departments in the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. The R drive is where there is shared information for all of the projects going on in the Wheat Breeding program. The metadata for this project will be kept in a personal laboratory notebook and in sections on some of the Word and Excel files on the R drive. Metadata will include the greenhouse conditions, any changes to the methods or materials and why, the parental backgrounds of the final products, explainations of why some parental backgrounds did not work, general information about the StepOne machine that runs KASP that affects the proejct, DNA concentrations from DNA extractions, dates of when tasks were performed, and information about plant health and vigor.

# Storage and security
The data will be stored on the lab's R drive and on a personal laptop. The R drive is the shared network that can be accessed directly through the lab's computers or if given permission, through a personal computer. The shared network is backed up by Roots IT Support which contains a back up drive for all information if needed. That way the data is stored in two completely seperate sources. The R drive will contain files from Word, Excel, as well as other formats such as specific files that come from StepOne machine. There will be an Excel file version that carries the same information as the StepOne machine. There are multiple copies in different formats of the information collected for DNA collection and genotyping. The metadata and thesis will be saved on the graduate student's perosnal laptop, as well as googledrive, as well as on the R drive. The thesis will be written on the googledrive, and then at the end of each writing session, will be saved onto the desktop and replace the previous thesis file. The file will then be added to the R drive and then replace the previous thesis file.

Any information on the personal laptop will be permenatley saved and be backed up using a "time machine". The informaiton on the R drive will be saved forever, but some files may be condensed in a few years. Only the important documents are maintained but as a breeding program, files tend to be saved to look back on information on different varieties. 

# Access and data sharing
There are no factors that will restrict the sharing of the data and there will be a CC0 license. All data will be publicly available when the thesis is published December 2019, however to make it more publically avaiable, the thesis will be rewritten and published to the open access jounral, Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition. The data will be published in ScholarsArchive@OSU. The thesis and research has to do with a potential new breeding scheme, so documenting its progression is the most important data to make publicly available. The lab created its own KASP markers and primers to run the DNA samples and that information can be shared as well.

The CoAxium Wheat was originally created by Colorado Wheat Research Foundation (CWRF) and Limargrain, a seed company. CWRF owns the patented herbicide resistant trait, that was invented at Colorado State University. Limagrain is in charge of licensing the trait, in the form of providing seeds with the trait, to other groups or breeders who would like to introgress the herbicide resistant trait into other genotypes. This means, with a license the seeds can be used for research or to create a new variety with the trait, but the seeds cannot be given away to other plant breeding or research groups. However, the final product (created by the group with the license) can be distributed to farmers. Therefore, the PI paid a trait fee to obtain a license from Limagrain in order to get the seeds with the berbicide resistant trait, but there are no restrictions on the usage of the seeds. The thesis or end result of this research is not a new variety, therefore there are no intellectual property rights that are not available to the public. It is the process, not the product, that is being researched (the OSU Wheat Breeding lab is creating their own herbicide resistant lines in a seperate project). In terms of policies governing the reuse, redistribution, and creation of derivatives of the data/licenses, there will not be any policies for the data generated. There is only a limitation on sharing the germplasm produced with other breeding institutions. Anyone who requests to use the germplasm will need a license from OSU and Limagrain.

The “R” drive is backed up and supported through Roots and us used to store the data as well as provide easy access to those in the lab. The data will be archived and preserved forever. The formats will be in Excel, Word and StepOne files (the format that the StepOne machine uses and detects the presence of certain genes/alleles, can also export data into Excel files). 


# Archiving and preservation
The data will be archived in the R drive, on a personal laptop and in the data repository ScholarsArchive@OSU. The R drive permanetly holds information and is paid for by OSU's Crop and Soil Science Department. Access to the R drive is through one of the lab computers or through a personal computer if granted special permission or can be requested. The data will be maintained in the forms they were created in, Excel or Word, on the R drive and personal laptop. There will not be enough data generated where there is a need to compress it right away. It will only be compressed if the lab sees it is obsolete. The PI, Robert Zemetra, is in charge of the information in the R drive. Graduate students and faculty are given full permission to access the R drive and are trained on how to access its data. ScholarsArchive@OSU has long term storage of data. The files there will be saved in schema (.xml) for the Excel files and plain text data (.txt) for Word documents.

Repository with source code [here](https://github.com/clarallebot/GRAD521_DMPtemplate)
